Jeff,

Our exchanges with Dave over the past couple of days have reminded me
that I did a little more work last month on studying the behavior of
Ackermann in the 1620 version of IPL-V, then got distracted and never
followed up with you on it.

First, you did send me a very simple IPL-V program, simple.ipl, which
I've tried, and which runs just fine. It also doesn't manipulate any
lists. What I was looking for was something a little more complex, but
without the hoary recursion of Ackermann.

Where I left this last time, as discussed in the quote below, was that
Ackermann(m, n) worked fine for all of the cases I've tried with n=0.
I've tried values of m up to 1000, although I'm not sure the output is
correct (or maybe I just don't understand what it's saying). Any test
with n>0 eventually starts printing "TRAPPED ON H2" messages endlessly
on the typewriter, which I suspect indicates the program is out of
available space.

A couple of weeks ago I decided to turn on the IPL-V tracing mechanism
(not the emulator instruction trace) to see if I could understand where
Ackermann(1, 1) was running off the rails. The result of that is
attached and discussed below.

IPL-V tracing seems to be controlled by the Program Switches on the 1620
control panel. I've tried various combinations of the switches, and my
current best guess is that they have the following functions:

  * Switch 1 -- When on, enables tracing. Apparently tracing also needs
    to be specified in the Q digit of an instruction. With Switch 1 off,
    that tracing appears to be disabled. Turning Switch 1 on outputs the
    trace to the card punch.
  * Switch 2 -- When on, also appears to enable tracing, but with this
    switch, I get a little bit more output. My guess is that this
    enables global tracing whether it's specified for any instructions
    or not.
  * Switch 3 -- When on, this appears to output something like a symbol
    table plus linkage information for the J-subroutines as they are
    selected and loaded into memory.
  * Switch 4 -- When on, this outputs the IPL-V source statements to the
    card punch with some addition data in the rightmost columns of the
    card. It looks to me as if this the "object code" assembled from
    each cell definition.

As far as I can tell, the switches operate independently and do not
affect the behavior of the other switches.

I started looking at the IPL-V tracing by modifying the Ackermann.ipl
source to have m=1, n=0, loaded the decks in sequence (object deck 1,
source file, subroutines file, object deck 2), and turned on all four
Program Switches. As Ackermann loaded, the card punch started logging
trace lines, but once the load finished and the assembled program began
to run, pretty quickly stopped with a Punch Check indicator. Punch
checks in the emulator are caused by sending invalid alphanumeric
digit-pair codes to the punch, which print as "?". You can reset the
check condition and continue, but I kept getting punch checks on almost
all of the lines output.

I took a memory dump, found the punch buffer in memory, and saw that,
indeed, the memory locations corresponding to the "?"s in the output did
have invalid alphanumeric codes. Finding out why that was happening took
me down quite a rabbit hole, tracing the 1620 instructions that
formatted those fields in the buffer, and eventually doing some
JavaScript-level tracing of those instruction implementation in the
emulator.

The problem turned out to be the result of a TNF (Transfer Numeric Fill,
op code 72). This instruction translates a field of numeric digits from
BCD to the 1620 two-digit alphanumeric codes. Basically it transfers the
digits from one field to another, interleaving each BCD digit from the
source with a 7 in the destination field. If the first (high-address)
digit in the field has a flag indicating a negative value, a 5 is
inserted instead of a 7. If you look at a 1620 code chart, 7n codes are
the decimal digit characters, while 5n codes are the letters J-R, which
is the old punched-card convention for signed digits. A flagged 0
doesn't actually have a character glyph assigned, but prints as a - on a
407 tabulator. The emulator uses "]" for that code.

The problem is, the 1620 Model 2 requires that the alphanumeric field
written by a TNF instruction be at an odd address. Alas, there were many
TNFs in the program that had an even address as their P operand. For an
example, see the TNF at card sequence 25670 in the U. Oregon IPL-V listing.

At first, I thought this might be a Model 1 vs Model 2 issue (Oregon
having had a 1620 Model 1), but the documentation for the Model 1 also
says that the P operand for a TNF must have an odd address. Apparently
you could get away with using an even address on some variants of the
Model 1, but not at all on the Model 2.

I stewed on this a while, trying to figure out how to deal with it. On a
whim, I decided to look at the two update documents that Rupert had
found in late June, and sure enough, Modification Letter Number 4
<https://purl.stanford.edu/qg281jn8061> addresses this very issue. There
is also a Modification Letter Number 3
<https://purl.stanford.edu/bk072pk3345> that has a few other changes, so
I decided to apply both of those and see what happened. I was a little
leery of doing this without having letters 1 and 2 as well, but there's
no way to know what problems that may have caused without having those
letters.

The short answer is that, other than fixing the punch checks, it made no
difference in the way the program worked. I still can't get Ackermann(m,
n) to finish cleanly when n>0. I did, however, get IPL-V traces for
Ackermann(1, 0) and Ackermann(1, 1). As far as I can tell from those
traces, things start to go wrong as soon as the recursion for the n
parameter begins.

At this point, the only thing I can think to do is to start tracing the
flow of the program in detail and try to figure out what isn't working.
I can't rule out an emulator bug, a Model 1 vs Model 2 incompatibility,
or an issue with the OCR of the program listing. My suspicion, though,
is that it's a bug in the 1620 code.

I'm sorry to say that I'm about burned out on this program, and have no
appetite for pursuing further debugging of this program, which I suspect
would be a big effort. It's been interesting trying to get this old
program to run and figuring out how to structure the load deck, but I'm
actually not interested in IPL-V itself, historically significant as it
may be. I also have doubts about the viability of the Oregon 1620
implementation even if the problem with Ackermann can be resolved,
especially with respect to your end goal of getting it to run LT.

I'm certainly willing, however, to continue consulting with you on this
and providing what 1620 expertise I have. You mentioned in your email
below that you could use some 1620 debugging guidance in the form of a
video or a Zoom session. I can certainly try to provide that. I think a
Zoom session (more likely a series of them) would be the better
approach. I'd suggest that we start with a generic debugging tutorial,
let you try doing some of that on your own, and then zero in on any
specific questions or issues that exercise uncovers.

I have made a few improvements recently to the new tracing feature in
the retro-1620 emulator and released that as v1.01. The changes have
been committed to the GitHub repo
<https://github.com/pkimpel/retro-1620> and uploaded to the hosting site
<https://www.phkimpel.us/IBM-1620/>. The project wiki
<https://github.com/pkimpel/retro-1620/wiki/UsingTheControlPanel#trace-instruction-execution>
now has basic documentation on the new trace facility.

I have /not/ committed the changes for Modification Letters 3 & 4 to the
software/ directory of the repo, however. I can do that, but would like
to hold off for a while. If you'd like me to do so, I would prefer to
commit it to a separate sub-directory in the repo.

Instead, I have attached a zip archive containing the following files
that incorporate those changes:

  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4.sps
    The updated SPS assembler source with Letters 3 & 4 applied.
  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4-Listing.lst
    An assembly listing of updated source.
  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4-Object-UNCOMPRESSED.card
    The uncompressed object code deck generated by the SPS assembler.
    The uncompressed deck embeds the SPS source code and was used to
    generate the assembly listing using a utility script that can be
    found in the repo
    <https://github.com/pkimpel/retro-1620/blob/main/software/retro-1620-Utilities/SPS-Object-Deck-Lister-LHCode.wsf>.
    Alas, it's a Windows Scripting VBScript file. Those have been
    deprecated for years, but they still run under Windows 11. (I'm
    currently studying Python so I can eventually rewrite my VBScript
    utilities using something that has a future).
  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4-Object.card
    The compressed object code deck generated by the SPS assembler. This
    was used to generate the Deck-1 and Deck-2 files mentioned next.
  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4-Deck-1.card
    The object deck for the IPL-V assembler/loader portion of the program.
  * IPL-V-Interpreter-Mod-3-4-Deck-2.card
    The object deck for the IPL-V interpreter portion of the program.
  * Ackermann-TEST.ipl
    The source code for the Ackermann(1, 1) test program.
  * IPL-V-Punch-Trace-Ack-1-0-20260823.txt
    Trace output from running Ackermann(1, 0) with all four Program
    Switches in the ON position.
  * IPL-V-Punch-Trace-Ack-1-1-20260823.txt
    Trace output from running Ackermann(1, 1) with all four Program
    Switches in the ON position (terminated after it was clearly running
    off the rails).
  * Ackermann-1-0-vs-1-1-Trace-20260823.pdf
    Side-by-side comparison of the two traces.

With these files and the latest version of the emulator, you should be
able to reproduce what I've done. I haven't included the
IPL-V-Subroutines.card file, which hasn't changed, and is available in
the repo